<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">VII.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8">“<span class="smallcaps">Sasha</span>, how lovely this N. N. is (Viéra Pavlovna named the officer with whom she wanted to become acquainted with Tambulik and Bosio in her dream); he brought me a new poem, which is not soon going to be published,” said Viéra Pavlovna at dinner. “Shall we set ourselves to reading it right after dinner? Yes? I have been waiting for you, and I am going to read it all with you, Sasha. And I have been longing to read it.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What poem is it?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Now you shall hear. Let us see if he succeeded in this thing. N. N. says that he⁠—I mean the author⁠—is pretty well satisfied with it.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">And so they settle themselves comfortably in her room, and she begins to read:⁠—</p>
			<div class="wst-size-block">
				<div class="wst-block-center">
					<p class="calibre8"><span class="wst-fqm">“</span>Oi! full, full the little basket is<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>With brocades and calicoes!<br class="calibre3"/>
					Sweetheart, pity! what a task it is<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>For the young lad as he goes!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8">“Now I see,” said Kirsánof, after listening to a score or so of stanzas; “this is a new style with him; but it is evidently his. Nekrásof’s?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> Yes? I am very grateful to you for waiting for me.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“You ought to be,” replied Viéra Pavlovna. Twice they read the little poem over, which, owing to their acquaintance with one of the author’s acquaintances, came into their hands three years before it was published.</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="367" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/367" data-page-number="347" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-600" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/367"/></span>“Do you know what verses affected me the most?” asked Viéra Pavlovna, after she had read several times with her husband certain parts of the poem. “These verses are not from the main part of the poem, but oh! my thoughts are greatly drawn to them. When Katya was waiting for the return of her bridegroom, she was very melancholy:⁠—</p>
			<div class="wst-size-block">
				<div class="wst-block-center">
					<p class="calibre8"><span class="wst-fqm">‘</span>Had I only time for worrying<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>I should die, thou heartless one!<br class="calibre3"/>
					Harvest time, and time is hurrying;<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>Scores of things must now be done!<br class="calibre3"/>
					<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-fqm">‘</span>Though it often to the maiden comes<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>That she suffers and must sigh,<br class="calibre3"/>
					Still the hay-cart heavy laden comes,<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>Still the sickle burns the rye.<br class="calibre3"/>
					<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-fqm">‘</span>She must thresh with all her might alas!⁠—<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>Thresh the grain the morning through;<br class="calibre3"/>
					Spread the flax at gloomy night, alas!<br class="calibre3"/>
					<span class="wst-gap1"/>On the meadows wet with dew.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8">These verses are not the principal ones in that episode: they are only a preface to the fact how this lovely Katya is dreaming about her life with Vanja; but my thoughts are greatly drawn to them.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, that is a perfect picture⁠—one of the very best in the poem. But they do not hold the best place in it, so they must have corresponded very closely to the thoughts which occupied you. What are these thoughts?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“They are these, Sasha. You and I have often said that the organization of woman is almost higher than that of man, and that therefore woman may force man to take second rank in intellectual life, when the rough force which predominates at the present time shall pass. We both have come to this conclusion by observation of life; you meet more women in life than men who are intellectual by nature. So it seems to us both. You confirmed this by various facts drawn from anatomy and physiology.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What offensive things you are speaking about man, and you say a great deal more than I do about it, Viérotchka. It <span><span data-page-index="368" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/368" data-page-number="348" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-601" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/368"/></span>is insulting to me! It is good that the time which you predict is very far off, else I should entirely change my opinion, so as not to go into the second rank. However, Viérotchka, this is only a probability; science has not collected enough data to settle this question positively.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Of course, my dear. We said that until this time the facts of history point to a different conclusion, though it is very probable, as we observe private life and the arrangement of the organism, woman has until lately played such a trifling part in intellectual life, because the predominating force deprived her of the means of culture and the motives for reaching development. This explanation is sufficient. But here is another similar case. If woman is measured by her physical strength, her organism is much weaker; but her organism is stronger. Isn’t that so?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“This is much less dubious than the question as to the natural endowment of intellectual strength. Yes, a woman’s organism offers a much stronger resistance to material forces of destruction⁠—climate, weather, and unhealthy food. Medicine and physiology have occupied themselves very little with the detailed investigation of this; but statistics have given an indisputable general answer that the average length of woman’s life is more than man’s. From this it can be seen that woman’s organism is stronger.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“So much the more strikingly can it be seen that the style of woman’s life is generally far less healthful than man’s!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“There is another important consideration by which the clearness of the result is made more manifest, and that is offered by physiology. Full maturity is reached rather sooner by woman than by man. Let us suppose that a woman’s growth ends at twenty and a man’s at twenty-five⁠—approximately in our climate and in our race. Let us suppose also, approximately, that the same proportion of women reach the age of seventy as of men who reach the age of sixty-five. If we consider the difference in the periods of growth, the preponderance of strength in woman’s organism will appear much more strikingly even than statistics grant, which, do not take into consideration the difference in the periods of maturity. Seventy years means three and a half times twenty years. Sixty-five should be divided by twenty-five: how much will it be? Yes, it will go two and a half times, with a remainder⁠—that is, two and three-fifths. Therefore a woman lives three and a half periods of her full <span><span data-page-index="369" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/369" data-page-number="349" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-602" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/369"/></span>development as easily as a man lives only two and a half periods of his. And by this proportion is measured the strength of her organism.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Indeed, there is a greater difference than I had believed.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, but I mentioned this only for example; I took round numbers, and depended on my memory. However, the conclusion is exactly as I said. Statistics show that woman’s organism is stronger. You got your conclusions only from the tables of life averages. But if the physiological facts are added to the statistical, the difference will be still greater.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“That is so, Sasha; just consider what I was thinking, and now it comes over me more strongly still. I was thinking, if a woman’s organism resists more powerfully the destructive impressions of matter, then it is altogether likely that woman should have greater strength in bearing mental shocks. But in reality we see that she is different.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, this is likely. Of course, so far this is only a supposition; this has not been studied; no special facts have been gathered. But really, your conclusion results so closely from the fact which is already undisputed that it is hard to distrust it. The strength of the organism is too closely connected with the strength of the nerves. In all likelihood woman’s nerves are more elastic, have a stronger structure; and if that is so, then they must more easily and firmly endure shocks and painful feelings. But in reality we see many examples of the contrary. A woman very often suffers torments over what a man bears easily. The analysis of the cause by which we see in real life such phenomena, contradicting what we ought to expect from the structure itself of her organism, has not yet been made with sufficient accuracy. But one of these causes is evident; it pervades all historical phenomena, and all the sides of our actual existence. This is a strength of prejudice, a bad habit, a false expectation, a false fear. If a man thinks, ‘I can’t,’ then he really can’t. It is constantly drummed into women’s ears, ‘You are weak,’ and so they feel that they are weak, and they really become weak. We have seen examples where people, absolutely healthy, have drooped till they really died, from the one idea that they were bound to grow weak and die. But there are examples which affect whole masses, nations, humanity in general. One of the most remarkable of these <span><span data-page-index="370" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/370" data-page-number="350" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-603" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/370"/></span>is the history of war. In the Middle Ages, the infantry imagined that it could not stand against cavalry⁠—and really it could not. Whole armies of infantry were driven about, like flocks of sheep, by a few hundred men on horseback. Till that time, when the continent first beheld the English infantry, consisting of proud, independent gentry, without fear, who were not accustomed to yield to any one without a fight, such an idea was not known. As soon as these people, who had no tradition that it was necessary to yield to cavalry, entered France, the cavalry, which even excelled them in numbers, was beaten by them at every engagement. You remember the remarkable victories gained by the small army of English infantry over the French cavalry at Cressy, at Poictiers, and at Agincourt. The very same history was repeated when the Swedish infantry took it into their heads that they had no reason to look upon themselves as weaker than the feudal cavalry. The Austrian, and afterwards the Burgundian, cavalry, superior in numbers, began to suffer defeats at every engagement; then all the other cavalry tried to battle with them, and all of them were defeated. Then all said, ‘Yes, the infantry seems to be stronger than cavalry.’ Of course it was stronger. But whole centuries have passed considering that the infantry was weak compared with cavalry, simply because they looked upon themselves as weak.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, Sasha, this is true. We are weak because we regard ourselves as weak; but it seems to me that there is still another cause. I want to speak about myself and you. Tell me, my dear, did I change much in those two weeks that you did not see me? You were too much worried then. It may have seemed to you more than it really was, or, in fact, the change was great. How does it seem to you now?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, you really were very thin and pale then.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Now, you see, my dear, I have learned that this is the very thing that touches my pride. You see, you love me very dearly. Why didn’t the struggle show itself in you in such evident signs as it did in me? For nobody saw you become pale or thin in those months when you were separated from me. How did you bear it so easily?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“This is why the verses interested you so much, where Katya overcomes her melancholy by work. You want to know whether I have experienced the truth of this remark, in regard to myself. Yes: it is absolutely true. I kept up the <span><span data-page-index="371" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/371" data-page-number="351" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-604" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/371"/></span>struggle easily, because I had no time to spend over it. Always, when I paid attention to it, I suffered keenly; but every-day necessities compelled me, for the large part of the time, to forget about it. I had to attend to my patients; to get ready for my lectures. At that time, not by my own will either, I freed myself from my thoughts. Those days when I had a good many leisure hours I felt that my strength was failing me. It seems to me that if I had remained a week a prey to my thoughts, I should have lost my mind.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“It is so, my dear; and I at last came to understand that in this lay the whole secret of the difference between me and you. You must have such activity that you <span class="wst-tooltip" title="[sic] 'cannot'">can</span> postpone it, that you cannot refuse it; then a person is incomparably firmer.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“But you had a great deal of activity then, and the same thing is true now.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Akh</i>, Sasha, are they things of such imperative importance? I devote myself to them as much as I please, and when I please. Whenever it seems good to me, I can devote less time to them, or put them off entirely. At a time when my mind is disturbed, it takes a special effort of the will, and only in that way can I compel myself to attend to them. There is no support in the necessity of them. For example, I busy myself with my household duties,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a> and I spend a great deal of time in them; but nine-tenths of this time I spend in this way only because I want to. With a good servant, shouldn’t I spend just as much time, even though there was less necessity to work? And who feels the necessity of wasting double time for the sake of the slight improvement over what he, with a less expenditure of time which might be my own? The only necessity upon me is my own will. When the mind is at ease, you give yourself up to these things; but when your mind is disturbed, you neglect them, because you can manage without them. You are apt to give up the less important for more important things. As soon as your feelings get greatly stirred up, they drive away the thoughts about other things. I give lessons, which are things of somewhat more importance; I cannot give them up at the dictate of my will. But this is not the point. I give them closer attention at one time than at another; if during the lesson my mind wanders somewhat, the lesson may go only a little worse than before, because teaching is very easy, and <span><span data-page-index="372" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/372" data-page-number="352" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-605" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/372"/></span>does not absorb the mind. And, after all, do I really make my living by my lessons? does my position depend on them? do they afford me the principal means for living as I do? No; these means were afforded me by Dmitri’s work, now by yours. Giving lessons flatters my feeling of independence; and really they are not unprofitable. Still, there is no vital necessity upon me for keeping them up. At that time I tried to drive away my tormenting thoughts by giving myself up to the shop more than usual; but again I did it more from the impulse of my will. You see, I understood that my presence at the shop was needed only for an hour or an hour and a half; that if I stayed there longer, I adopt an artificial occupation, that may be useful, but is not indispensable for the business. And then, again, this very thing, can it serve as a support for such ordinary mortals as we? Rakhmétof belongs to a different species. They take hold of common affairs in such a way that the necessity of it fills their existence; for them it even forms a substitute for personal existence. But for us, Sasha, this is unattainable. We are not eagles, like him; we can live only in our personal lives. Is the shop my personal life? This affair is not my affair, but others’. I occupy myself with it, not for my own sake, but for theirs. Let us admit that it is for my own satisfaction; but can those such as we⁠—not eagles⁠—bother themselves about others when they are themselves in trouble? Can they give themselves up to their convictions when they are tormented by their feelings? No; a personal interest, an unavoidable necessity on which your life depends, is required; a necessity which for my own self, for my style of life, my means of life, for my whole situation in life, for my entire fate, would be more powerful than all my drawings towards passion. Only such a stimulus can serve as a support in battle with passion; only such a thing cannot be conquered by passion, but by itself overwhelms passions; only such a thing gives strength and rest. I want such a stimulus.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“You are right, my dear, you are right,” said Kirsánof, kissing his wife, whose eyes were flashing with enthusiasm. “You are right; and I never thought of it before, though it is so evident; I had not noticed it. Yes, Viérotchka, no one else can think for another. Whoever wants to enjoy life must think for himself, look out for himself; no one else is going to do it for him. But what necessity do you feel upon you now? Are you going to fall in love with some one else, Viérotchka?”</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="373" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/373" data-page-number="353" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-606" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/373"/></span>Viéra Pavlovna laughed heartily, and for some time neither of them could say a word from laughing.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, now we both can appreciate that,” she said finally. “Now I can be perfectly sure, and so can you, that nothing of the sort can possibly happen. But seriously, do you know how it seems to me, my dear? If my love for Dmitri was not the love of a fully developed woman, neither did he love me in the sense of the word as we understand it. His feeling for me was a combination of a very warm attachment to me as a friend, with occasional outbursts of passion towards me as a woman. He felt a personal friendship for me, for me particularly; but these outbursts were only the attraction towards woman; they had no personal relation to me. No, that was not love. Was he much concerned with thoughts about me? No; they did not interest him. No, on his side, as well as on mine, there was no real love.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“You are unjust to him, Viérotchka.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“No, Sasha; this is so. In talk between you and me there is no use in flattering him. Both of us know how highly we prize him. We also know that, no matter how he protested that it was easy for him, in reality it was not easy. You may also declare that it was an easy matter to struggle with your passion. All this is well, and it is not put on; but such keen assurances must not be taken in the literal sense of the word.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
