<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">XVI.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">But</span> the main thing was, did they love each other? Let us begin with her. There was one case when she showed some solicitude about Beaumont; but how did this case end? Quite otherwise from what might have been expected at the beginning. Beaumont got into the habit of calling at the Pólozofs’ literally every day, sometimes making longer calls than at others, but every day just the same. And this caused Pólozof to think that he was going to offer himself to Katerina Vasílyevna; he had no other foundations for such <span><span data-page-index="454" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/454" data-page-number="434" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-688" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/454"/></span>a belief. But one evening it happened that Beaumont did not come. “You don’t know what is the matter with him, do you, papa?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I have not heard; I guess there is nothing the matter. He probably did not have time.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">A second evening passed, and still there was no Beaumont. On the following morning, Katerina Vasílyevna was evidently going somewhere. “Where are you going. Kátya?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Somewhere, papa, on my own business.” She went to find about Beaumont. He was sitting in his wide-sleeved overcoat, and was reading; he lifted his eyes from the book when the door opened.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Katerina Vasílyevna, is this you? I am very glad and very grateful to you,” he said in the same tone as he would have addressed her father; possibly the tone was a little more cordial.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What is the matter, Mr. Beaumont, that you have not been to see us for so long? You made me worry about you, and besides, you made me feel my lonesomeness.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“It was nothing particular, Katerina Vasílyevna; as you see, I am well. Won’t you take some tea with me? You see I am just having mine.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Of course I will; but why have you stayed away from us so long?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Piotr, bring a glass. You see I am well; a mere trifle; this is the reason: I was at the factory with Mr. Lotter, and while I was explaining something to him, I was rather careless; and putting my arm on a screw, it turned around and scratched my arm through the sleeve, and so I have not been able to put on my coat for the last three days.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Let me see it; else I shall be worried lest it is not a scratch, but a serious wound.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, it must be a big one” (here Piotr comes in with a glass for Katerina Vasílyevna)⁠—“when I make use of both my hands. However, I will show it to you.” He rolled up his sleeve to the elbow. “Piotr, throw the ashes out of the tray, and give me my cigar-holder; it’s on the library table. See, it is a mere trifle; nothing but an English plaster was necessary.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes; but there is still some swelling, and it is inflamed.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yesterday there was considerably more, and by to-morrow there will be none at all.”</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="455" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/455" data-page-number="435" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-689" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/455"/></span>Piotr, after cleaning out the ash-tray and bringing the cigar-holder, leaves the room.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I did not want to appear before you as a wounded hero.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Why didn’t you write me, then?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Da!</i> I thought that I should be able to put on my coat right away; that is, day before yesterday; and day before yesterday, I expected to put it on yesterday; and yesterday, to-day. I thought it was not worth while to worry you.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, and you have worried me all the more. It was not nice of you, Mr. Beaumont. And when shall you finish this business of yours?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Da!</i> probably in a day or two; the delay is not our fault. Mr. Lotter and I are all ready, but it is the stockholders.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“And what have you been reading?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“A new novel by Thackeray. How can a man write himself out so when he has such a talent! It is because his fund of ideas is getting low.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I have read it; it is quite true.” And she went on to speak of Thackeray’s failing powers. Then they so spoke about half an hour on various other topics in the very same manner.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Well, it is almost time for me to go to Viéra Pavlovna. When do you want to make her acquaintance? They are lovely people.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I will try to arrange to do it soon; I will ask you to introduce me. I am very grateful to you for your visit. Is that your horse?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, it is mine.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“That’s the reason why your bátiushka never rides him. It is a very good horse.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I think he is; I don’t know much about them.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“It’s a beautiful horse, sir; cost three hundred and fifty rubles,” said the coachman.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“How old is he?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Six years, sir.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Let us start, Zakhár; I am all ready. Good by, Mr. Beaumont; will you come to-day?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Hardly likely, no; to-morrow, sure.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<span>
				<span data-page-index="456" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/456" data-page-number="436" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-690" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/456"/>
			</span>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
