<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">XXV.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8">"<span class="smallcaps">The</span> best distraction for thoughts is work," said Viéra Pavlovna to herself, and she was entirely right. "I shall spend every day in the shop until I am cured, and this will help me." She began to spend the whole day in the shop. The first day she really succeeded in greatly distracting her thoughts; the second day she only tired herself out, but she could not entirely escape from them; on the third she could not get rid of them at all. Thus passed a week.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">The struggle was hard. Viéra Pavlovna's face grew pale, but, by outward appearances, she was entirely calm; she even tried to seem happy, and in this respect she succeeded almost without interruption. But if no one could notice anything, and her paleness were ascribed to some slight ailment, yet Lopukhóf was not deceived; he knew perfectly well how it was; he had no need to look.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"Viérotchka," he began at the end of a week, "as we are living now, we carry out the old proverb that the cobbler has no boots, and the tailor's clothes don't fit him. We are teaching others to live according to our economical principles, but we, ourselves, don't take it into our heads to arrange our own lives in accordance with them. Isn't one large household more advantageous than several small ones? I should like to apply this law to our own housekeeping arrangements. If we had lived with somebody, we, and those who lived with us, would have saved almost half of our expenses. I should be able to give up those execrable lessons, which I detest so; my salary from the factory would be enough, and I should get time for relaxation. I could occupy my time with scientific work, and thus have taken up my career again. It is only necessary to find people such as it would be agreeable to live with. What do you think about this?"</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Viéra Pavlovna had been looking at her husband with eyes full of suspicion, and burning with indignation just as Kirsánof had looked at him on the day of their theoretical conversation. After he stopped speaking, her face was on fire.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"I beg of you to cease this conversation; it is not becoming."</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="282" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/282" data-page-number="262" data-page-quality="4" id="calibre_link-515" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/282"/></span>"Why so, Viérotchka? I am only speaking about pecuniary advantages; such people as you and I, who are not rich, must not neglect them. My work is hard, and a part of it is even detestable to me."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"You have no right to speak so to me." Viéra Pavlovna got up. "I shall not allow you to speak to me in dark words. Dare to speak freely what you mean!"</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"I only want to tell you this, Viérotchka: that taking into consideration our advantage, it would be good for us."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"Again, silence! Who gave you the right to be master over me? I shall despise you!" She ran quickly to her own room and locked the door.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">This was their first and their last quarrel.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Till late that night Viéra Pavlovna sat with her door locked; then she returned to her husband's room.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"My dear,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-158"><a href="#calibre_link-110" type="noteref"><span>[</span>17<span>]</span></a></sup> I spoke to you very severe words, but do not be angry at them. You see that I am doing my best; instead of helping me, you began to help along what I am struggling against, hoping,—yes, hoping—to win the victory."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"Forgive me, my love,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-163"><a href="#calibre_link-111" type="noteref"><span>[</span>18<span>]</span></a></sup> for beginning so roughly, but now we are reconciled, aren't we? Let us talk reasonably."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"Oh, yes, we are reconciled, my dear. Only don't act against me. It is hard enough, even as it is, to struggle against myself."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"And it is useless, Viérotchka; you have had plenty of time to examine your feeling: you have seen that it is more serious than you believed at first. Why torment yourself?"</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"No, my dear,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-159"><a href="#calibre_link-110" type="noteref"><span>[</span>17<span>]</span></a></sup> I want to love you, and I do not want to wrong you."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"My dear,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-160"><a href="#calibre_link-110" type="noteref"><span>[</span>17<span>]</span></a></sup> you wish me to be happy. What! do you think that it is pleasant for me to see you keep tormenting yourself?"</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"My dear,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-161"><a href="#calibre_link-110" type="noteref"><span>[</span>17<span>]</span></a></sup> but you love me so!"</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"Of course I do, very dearly: there is no need of saying that; but we both understand what love means: does it not consist in the fact that you are happy in the happiness, that you suffer with the suffering, of the one whom you love. When you torment yourself, you torment me."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"So it is, my dear;<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-162"><a href="#calibre_link-110" type="noteref"><span>[</span>17<span>]</span></a></sup> but you will suffer if I yield to this feeling, which—<i class="calibre13">akh!</i> I cannot understand why it should have come to me; I curse it!"</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="283" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/283" data-page-number="263" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-516" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/283"/></span>"It makes no difference how or why it came to you; you cannot help it. Now there is only one choice: either you should suffer, and I suffer also through it, or that you cease to suffer, and I too."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"But, my dear,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-164"><a href="#calibre_link-112" type="noteref"><span>[</span>19<span>]</span></a></sup> I am not going to suffer; this will pass away; you will see this pass."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"Thank you for your efforts; I appreciate them, because you show a will to fulfil what you deem your duty. But know, Viérotchka, that it seems necessary only to you, and not to me. I am looking upon it as a stranger; and your position is clearer to me than it is to yourself. I know that this will be useless. Struggle as long as your strength holds out, but don't think that you are going to wrong me. For you know how I look upon this; you know that my view of this matter cannot be shaken, and is founded in the nature of things: you know all this. Can you deceive me? Will you ever cease to respect me? I can say further: even if your disposition towards me changed its nature, will it grow weaker? Isn't the contrary true? would it not grow stronger from the very fact that you did not find in me an enemy? Don't pity me; my fate will not be in the least pitiful because you will not be deprived of happiness on my account. But that's enough. It is hard to say much about it, and for you to hear is harder still. Only remember, Viérotchka, what I am saying now. Forgive me, Viérotchka. Go to your room and think it over, or, rather, go to sleep. Don't think about me, but think about yourself. Only by thinking about yourself, you may not cause me useless sorrow."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
