<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">XX.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8">“<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is now the twenty-eighth of April; he said that he should be through by the first of July. Let us say the tenth; but that is not the first. Well, we can take the tenth; or, so as to get nearer, I’ll suppose it’s the fifteenth. No, I’ll take the tenth, after all. Now, how many days are left? To-day should not be counted; there are only five hours of it left. There are two days more in April; May, <span><span data-page-index="149" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/149" data-page-number="129" data-page-quality="4" id="calibre_link-382" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/149"/></span>thirty-one, and two make thirty-three; June, thirty, and thirty-three makes sixty-three; in July ten days; altogether it makes seventy-three. Is that much? Only seventy-three days, and then⁠—freedom! I shall get out of this cellar. <i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> how happy I am! My <i class="calibre13">mílenki!</i> how cleverly he thought it all out! How happy I am!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">This was on Sunday evening. On Monday came a lesson given instead of Tuesday.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“My dear, my beloved!<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-79"><a href="#calibre_link-62" type="noteref"><span>[</span>7<span>]</span></a></sup> how glad I am to be with you, if only for a minute! Do you know how many days there are left for me to be in this cellar? When will you be done? Will you be done by the tenth of July?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, Viérotchka.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Then I shall have to sit in this cellar only seventy-two days and this evening. One day I have marked off already. See I have made a little calendar just as boarding-school girls and boys do, and I cross off the days. How delightful it is to cross them off!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“My dear little Viérotchka, my dear!<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-80"><a href="#calibre_link-63" type="noteref"><span>[</span>8<span>]</span></a></sup> Indeed, you have not long to worry along here; two months and a half will quickly pass, and you will be free.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> how delightful it will be! Only just at present, my dearest,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-81"><a href="#calibre_link-64" type="noteref"><span>[</span>9<span>]</span></a></sup> don’t always talk with me, and don’t look at me; and we must not play on the piano every time you come, either. And I shall not come out of my room every time that you come here; no, I shall not have enough strength of mind for that. I shall come out always, if only for one minute; and I shall look at you so coldly; not fondly at all. And now I am going right away to my room. Good by, my dear.<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-83"><a href="#calibre_link-65" type="noteref"><span>[</span>10<span>]</span></a></sup> When?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Thursday.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Three days; how long! But then there will be only sixty-eight days left.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Count less; about the seventh you will be able to get away from here.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“The seventh? Then it is now only sixty-eight days. How happy you have made me! Good by, my dear.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8"><br class="calibre3"/>
			<span class="smallcaps">Thursday</span>.⁠—“My dearest,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-82"><a href="#calibre_link-64" type="noteref"><span>[</span>9<span>]</span></a></sup> there are only sixty-six days to stay here.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, Viérotchka; the time flies fast.” <span><span data-page-index="150" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/150" data-page-number="130" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-383" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/150"/></span>“Fast? No, my dear. <i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> how long the days seem! Sometimes it seemed to me as though a whole month had dragged along while these three days were passing. Good by, my dearest,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-84"><a href="#calibre_link-66" type="noteref"><span>[</span>11<span>]</span></a></sup> we must not talk long; aren’t we shrewd? yes? Good by. <i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> only sixty-six remain for me to sit in the cellar.⁠—Hm! hm! it is not so noticeable, of course; when one is at work, time flies. And then I am not in a cellar. Hm! hm! <i class="calibre13">da!</i>”</p>
			<p class="calibre8"><br class="calibre3"/>
			<i class="calibre13">Saturday</i>.⁠—”<i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> my dearest,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-86"><a href="#calibre_link-67" type="noteref"><span>[</span>12<span>]</span></a></sup> only sixty-four days are left. <i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> how gloomy it is here! These two days have seemed longer than those three days. <i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> how gloomy! How miserable it is here; if you only realized it, my dear.<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-88"><a href="#calibre_link-68" type="noteref"><span>[</span>13<span>]</span></a></sup> Good by, my dear, my sweetheart,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-89"><a href="#calibre_link-69" type="noteref"><span>[</span>14<span>]</span></a></sup> till Tuesday; and these three days will seem longer than the last five. Good by, my dear.⁠—Hm! hm! <i class="calibre13">da!</i> hm! her eyes look badly. She does not like to weep. This is not well. Hm! <i class="calibre13">da!</i>”</p>
			<p class="calibre8"><br class="calibre3"/>
			<i class="calibre13">Tuesday</i>.⁠—”<i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> my dearest,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-87"><a href="#calibre_link-67" type="noteref"><span>[</span>12<span>]</span></a></sup> I gave up counting the days. They don’t pass⁠—they don’t pass at all.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Viérotchka, my little friend, I have a favor to ask of you. We must have a nice little talk together. You are anxiously longing for freedom. Well, give yourself a little freedom; we must have a talk together.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, we must, <i class="calibre13">moï mílenki</i>, we must.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Then I will ask you how this suits you. What time will it be most convenient for you to-morrow; it does not make the least difference what time, only tell me; be again on that bench of the Konno-<span class="wst-tooltip" title="[sic]">Gvardiesky</span> Boulevard. Will you?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I will be there, <i class="calibre13">moï mílenki</i>, without fail. At eleven o’clock; is that right?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Very well; thank you, little friend.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Good by, my dearest.<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-85"><a href="#calibre_link-66" type="noteref"><span>[</span>11<span>]</span></a></sup> <i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> how glad I am that you have thought about it! How was it that I, myself, foolish little thing that I am, did not think about it? Good by. We will talk; at all events, I shall breathe the fresh air. Good by, <i class="calibre13">mílenki</i>. At eleven o’clock, without fail.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8"><br class="calibre3"/>
			<span class="smallcaps">Friday</span>.⁠—“Viérotchka, where are you going?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I, <i class="calibre13">mámenka?</i>”</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="151" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/151" data-page-number="131" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-384" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/151"/></span>Viérotchka blushed.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“To the Nevsky Prospekt, <i class="calibre13">mámenka</i>.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Then I am going with you, Viérotchka; I have an errand at the Gostinui Dvor. What did you put on such a dress as that for, Viérotchka, when you say you are going to the Nevsky. You ought to put on a better one when you are going to the Nevsky; folks’ll see you.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I like this dress. Just wait one second, <i class="calibre13">mámenka;</i> I want to get just one thing out of my room.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">They start; they go. They reached the Gostinui Dvor. They were going along the block that runs parallel with Sadovaïa Street; they are not far from the Nevsky corner, and here is Ruzanof’s shop.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Mámenka</i>, I have two words to tell you.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What is the matter with you, Viérotchka?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Good by, <i class="calibre13">mámenka</i>. I don’t know whether we shall meet again soon. If you don’t get angry, it’ll be to-morrow.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What is it, Viérotchka? I cannot understand it, somehow?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Good by, <i class="calibre13">mámenka;</i> I am going to my husband. Dmitri Sergéitch and I were married three days ago. Drive to Karavannaïa Street, Izvoshchik.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“A quarter, lady.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“All right; only be quick about it. He will call upon you this evening, <i class="calibre13">mámenka;</i> and don’t get angry with me, <i class="calibre13">mámenka</i>.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">These words hardly reached Marya Alekséyevna’s ears.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Don’t drive to Karavannaïa Street; I only said so as to get away from that lady as quickly as I could. Go to the left<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-90"><a href="#calibre_link-70" type="noteref"><span>[</span>15<span>]</span></a></sup> down Nevsky. I must go much further than Karavannaïa Street, to the Vasilyevsky Island, the fifth block behind the Middle Prospekt. Drive fast; I will give you a good fee.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Akh!</i> lady, you were pleased to fool me. You’ll have to give me half a ruble.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“If you drive fast.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
