<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">XIX.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">On</span> the next day at three o’clock Katerina Vasílyevna went to Viéra Pavlovna.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I am to be married day after to-morrow, Viéra Pavlovna,” she said as she entered; “and this evening I am going to bring my bridegroom to see you.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Beaumont, of course, whom you have been crazy over this long time.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I, crazy? When everything passed off so quietly and reasonably!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I thoroughly believe that you talked with him very quietly and sensibly; but with me, quite otherwise.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Really, this is interesting! But here is something more interesting: he loves you very much⁠—both of you; but you, Viéra Pavlovna, much more than Aleksandr Matvéitch.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Is there anything interesting in that? If you have spoken to him about me with a thousandth part of the <span><span data-page-index="464" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/464" data-page-number="444" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-698" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/464"/></span>enthusiasm with which you have spoken about him to me then, of course⁠—”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Do you think that he knows you through me? Here’s where the fun comes in, that he knows you personally, not through me, but far better than I do.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“That’s news! How is that?</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“How? I am going to tell you right away. The very first day that he came to Petersburg he was very anxious to see you, but it seemed to him that it would be better to postpone the acquaintance till he should come to you, not by himself, but with a ‘bride’ or a wife. It seemed to him that it would be pleasanter for you to see him with a wife than single. You see that our engagement came about through his desire to make your acquaintance.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“He marries you so as to get acquainted with me!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“The idea! who says that he marries me for your sake? Oh, no! we get married, of course, not from love to you. But did we know of each other’s existence until he came to Petersburg, and if he had not come, how should we have got acquainted? But he came to Petersburg for your sake! How absurd you are!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Does he speak Russian better than English?” asked Viéra Pavlovna, in excitement.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“He speaks Russian just as I do, and English just as I do.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“My dear Kátenka, how glad I am!” Viéra Pavlovna threw her arms around her guest.⁠—“Sasha, come here! hurry, hurry!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What is it, Viérotchka? How d’ye do, Katerina Vas⁠—”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">He had no chance to speak her whole name before the young lady was kissing him.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“To-day is Easter, Sasha. Say to Kátenka, ‘<i class="calibre13">Indeed, he is risen</i>.<span class="calibre42">’</span>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a></p>
			<p class="calibre8">“But what is this all about?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Sit down, and she will tell you everything. And I myself have not heard all I want about it. That’ll do; you have had enough kisses! and before me too! Now tell us, Kátenka!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<span>
				<span data-page-index="465" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/465" data-page-number="445" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-699" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/465"/>
			</span>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
