<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
			<p>Bridegrooms had swarmed by the hundred around the heiress of the great fortune; but the society which flocked to Pólozof’s dinners and suppers was a society of that excessively dubious type, of that excessively dubious refinement, which is generally found crowding the parlors of all such rich people as Pólozof, lifted above the more or less polite but still not fashionable circle in which they are born, without having any relationship or connection in the more or less genuinely polite society of the fashionable world. They become the benefactors of cunning adventurers and dandies who are absolutely indecent in their outward appearance, without speaking of their inward qualities. Therefore, Katerina Vasílyevna became interested when among the number of admirers came a genuine society man of absolutely good breeding; he behaved with so much more refinement; he spoke so much more sensibly and wittily than the others. Her father soon noticed that she was going to prefer him above the others; and, as an active, decided, substantial man, he immediately had a talk with his daughter:⁠—</p>
			<p>“My dear Katya⁠—Sólovtsof, look out for him; he is a very bad man, a perfectly heartless man; you would be so <span><span data-page-index="426" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/426" data-page-number="406" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-660" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/426"/></span>unhappy with him, that I would rather see you dead than his wife. It would be easier for both me and you.”</p>
			<p>Katerina Vasílyevna loved her father; she was accustomed to respect his opinion; he never put restrictions upon her; she knew that he was speaking thus because he loved her; and above all, her character was inclined more to regard the wishes of those who loved her than of her caprices; she was one of those who liked to say to her friends, “I will do as you think best.”</p>
			<p>She answered her father: “I like Sólovtsof; but if you think it is better for me to keep at a distance from him, I shall do so.”</p>
			<p>Of course she would not have done so; and as her nature was opposed to falsehood, she would not have said so if she had loved him. Her attachment to Sólovtsof was as yet very weak. At that time it had hardly taken root; he was merely more interesting to her than others. She began to grow cool towards him; and maybe everything would have ended satisfactorily; but the father in his zeal put in too much salt; and, though in reality he did not put on much, yet it was enough to salt off the polite Sólovtsof. He saw that he must play the part of a victim, but how to find a pretext for becoming a victim. Pólozof somehow stepped on his toes; Sólovtsof, with a sense of self-respect and pain on his face, took leave of them, and ceased his calls. A week later, Katerina Vasílyevna received from him a passionate and exceedingly humble letter, to the effect that he never expected that his love would be returned, that for his happiness it would be sufficient for him to see her occasionally, even though he did not speak with her but only saw her; that he was willing to sacrifice even this happiness, and yet he would be happy or unhappy, and so on, without a single request or wish. He did not even ask for a reply. Such letters kept coming; and finally they had their effect.</p>
			<p>But it took a long time before they had their effect. Katerina Vasílyevna, at first after Sólovtsof left, was neither melancholy nor sorrowfully inclined, and even before that she had been cool to him; and she accepted so calmly her father’s advice to look out for him, that consequently when, after too months, she began to grow despondent, what could make her father think that Sólovtsof was at the bottom of it, when he had forgotten all about him?</p>
			<p>“It seems to me you’re under the weather, Kátya.”</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p><span><span data-page-index="427" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/427" data-page-number="407" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-661" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/427"/></span>“No; it’s nothing⁠—nothing; it’ll pass.”</p>
			<p>In a week or two the old man was already asking, “Are you ill, Kátya?”</p>
			<p>“No, not at all.”</p>
			<p>Two weeks later the old man said, “You must see the doctor, Kátya.”</p>
			<p>Kátya begins to consult the doctor; and the old man is entirely at ease because the doctor finds no cause of alarm. “It is only a weakness, some exhaustion”; and he very sensibly ascribed it to weariness, arising from Katerina’s style of life the past winter. Every night she had been up at parties till two or three, or even five o’clock, in the morning. “This exhaustion will pass.” But it did not pass; it rather increased.</p>
			<p>Why did not Katerina Vasílyevna tell her father? She was convinced that this would have been in vain. Her father had told her before very firmly, and he does not speak unmeaning words. He does not like to express opinions about people without being sure of what he says; and he will never consent to her marrying a man whom he considers to be bad.</p>
			<p>And so Katerina Vasílyevna kept on dreaming and dreaming while reading Sólovtsof’s humble and hopeless letters; and after half a year’s such reading, she was within half a step of consumption. And not by a single word could her father perceive that her disease originated from a matter in which he was partly to blame; his daughter had been as tender towards him as before.</p>
			<p>“Is there anything that isn’t to your mind?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing, papa.”</p>
			<p>And it is evident that there is nothing; she is only out of spirits, but this is from her weakness, from illness. And the doctor declares that it is the result of her illness. But what is the cause of the illness? As soon as the doctor regarded the illness as trifling, he contented himself with laying the blame on dances and corsets; but when he saw that it was getting dangerous, then appeared his “innutrition of the nerves⁠—<i xml:lang="la">atrophia nervorum</i>.”</p>
			<p>
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<span>
				<span data-page-index="428" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/428" data-page-number="408" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-662" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/428"/>
			</span>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
