<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">VII.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">Storeshnikof</span> kept thinking more and more frequently, “Well, now, suppose I should take and marry her?” What happened to him was a very common thing, not only with people of weak character of his stamp, but also not seldom with people of more independent character. In the histories of the nations such cases as his fill the volumes of Hume and Gibbon, Ranke and Thierry; men crowd only to one side simply because they do not hear the words, “Now strive, brethren, to take the other side”; and if by chance they hear and turn to the other side of the circle, then they go to crowding just as bad on the other side. Storeshnikof had heard and seen that rich young men were in the habit of taking poor and pretty young girls as mistresses. Well, and so he tried to make Viérotchka his mistress. No other word had entered his head; he heard the other word, “You might marry her”; well, now he begins to think about the word <span><span data-page-index="62" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/62" data-page-number="42" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-295" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/62"/></span>“wife,” just as before he thought about the word “mistress.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">This is a universal characteristic, and Storeshnikof illustrates very clearly in his own case nine-tenths of the motives in the history of the human race. But historians and psychologists say that in every special fact the universal cause is “individualized,” according to their expression, by local, temporary, national, and personal elements, although they⁠—that is, these elements⁠—are important; for example, all spoons, albeit they are spoons, yet whoever gobbles soup or <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">shchi</i> with the spoon in his hand must examine that special spoon. Therefore let us examine Storeshnikof!</p>
			<p class="calibre8">The principal thing that Julie had said⁠—as though she had been reading all the Russian novels that treat of such things⁠—was this, Resistance strengthens desire.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">The thought about Viérotchka took possession of Storeshnikof after the theatre with more power than ever before. After exhibiting to his friends the mistress of his fancy, it seemed to him that she was much more beautiful than he had imagined. Beauty, just like intellect or any other valuable thing, is treasured by the majority of people exactly according as it is reckoned by the general opinion. Everybody sees that a handsome face is handsome, but to what degree it is handsome, how can that be expressed unless its rank takes a diploma? Viérotchka, sitting in the gallery or in the back row of the theatre, would not have been noticed; but when she appeared in a box in the second tier, a good many opera-glasses were directed towards her; and how many encomiums of her beauty did not Storeshnikof hear, when, after seeing her to her carriage, he returned to the foyer. And Serge! Oh, what a refined taste he has! And Julie! Well, when such good fortune is hatched, there is no need of making a choice as to the way of possessing it.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">His self-love was stirred at the same time as his passion. But it was touched also on the other side. “It is hardly likely that she will accept you.” What! not accept him with such a uniform and such an estate? No, you are mistaken, Frenchwoman; she will take it; of course, she will, she will!</p>
			<p class="calibre8">There was still another reason of the same stamp. Storeshnikof’s mother, of course, would oppose his choice; his mother is a representative of the world, and Storeshnikof hitherto has stood in awe of his mother, and of course he has <span><span data-page-index="63" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/63" data-page-number="43" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-296" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/63"/></span>been burdened by his dependence on her. For people who have no strength of character it is very charming to think, “I am not afraid. I have a strong character.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Of course, there was also a desire to advance in his worldly career through his wife.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">And to all this there was added the fact that Storeshnikof did not dare to show himself to Viérotchka in his former rôle, and meantime he could not resist looking at her.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">In a word, Storeshnikof each day thought more seriously of getting married, and at the end of a week, when Marya Alekséyevna, after returning from a late service, was sitting down and thinking how she might catch him, he himself appeared, and made an offer of marriage. Viérotchka did not come out of her room, and so he could only speak with Marya Alekséyevna. Marya Alekséyevna of course said that she on her part looked upon it as a great honor, but as a loving mother, she must know her daughter’s mind, and asks him to call for his answer on the next morning.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Nu!</i> she’s a trump, my girl Viéra,” said Marya Alekséyevna to her husband, surprised at such an abrupt turning of the case; “just see how she has got the young lad under her thumb. And I was thinking and thinking, and did not know how to put my wits to work; I was thinking how much bother it would cost me to catch him again; I was thinking how the whole affair was ruined, while she, my <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">golubushka</i> [my darling, literally, little pigeon], did not spoil it at all, but brought it round all right. She knew how it was necessary to act. <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Nu!</i> she is cunning; it’s no use talkin’.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“The Lord inspires infants with wisdom,” said Pavel Konstantinuitch.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">He seldom played any part in domestic life. But Marya Alekséyevna was a stern observer of the good old traditions, and on such a solemn occasion as the telling her daughter about the offer, she allowed her husband to take the rôle of honor, which by right belongs to the head and ruler of the family. Pavel Konstantinuitch and Marya Alekséyevna seated themselves on the sofa, as on the most solemn place, and sent Matrióna to ask the <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">baruishna</i> to come to them.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Viéra,”⁠—Pavel Konstantinuitch began⁠—“Mikhaïl Ivanuitch has done us the honor of asking your hand. We answered like loving parents that we would not compel you, but we said that on our side we were glad. You, as a good and dutiful daughter, such as you have always appeared to <span><span data-page-index="64" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/64" data-page-number="44" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-297" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/64"/></span>be, will depend on our experience, that we have not dared to ask God for such a husband for you. Do you agree, Viéra?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“No,” said Viérotchka.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What is that you say, Viéra?” cried Pavel Konstantinuitch. The thing was so plain that even he could cry out, not asking his wife how to act.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Have you lost your senses, you fool? Repeat that if you dare, you disobedient thing!” cried Marya Alekséyevna, doubling her fists against her daughter.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Forgive me, <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">mámenka</i>,” said Viéra, rising; “if you touch me, I will leave the house; if you lock me up, I will jump out of the window. I knew how you would take my refusal, and I have resolved how to act. Take a seat, and sit down, or I shall go.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Marya Alekséyevna sat down again. “What a piece of stupidity! that front door is not under lock and key; she would push away the bolt in a second; we could not ketch her. She would run away! she is crazy!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I shall not marry him! Without my consent, they can’t marry me!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Viéra, you are losing your senses,” said Marya Alekséyevna in a choking voice.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“How can that be? What answer can we give him to-morrow?” exclaimed her father.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“You are not to blame towards him, but I will not consent.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">This scene lasted about two hours. Marya Alekséyevna was in a stew; twenty times she began to cry out, and clench her fists, but Viérotchka said: “Don’t get up, or I shall leave!” They kept beating about the bush, but they could not do anything. It ended when Matrióna came in to ask whether she would put on the dinner. “The <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">pirog</i> [pie] was overdone.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Think till evening, Viéra. Come to your senses, you fool!” said Marya Alekséyevna, and whispered something to Matrióna.</p>S
			<p class="calibre8">“<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Mámenka</i>, you are going to do something to me! to take out the key from my bedroom, or something else. Don’t you do it, or it will be worse!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Marya Alekséyevna said to the cook, “No matter. What a beast she is! this Viérka! If it were not that he wanted her on account of her face, I would beat her till she bled! But now how can I touch her? She will disfigure herself, the confounded fool!”</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="65" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/65" data-page-number="45" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-298" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/65"/></span>They went in to dinner. They dined quietly. After dinner Viérotchka went to her room. Pavel Konstantinuitch lay down, as he usually did, to take a nap, but this time the nap was a failure. As soon as he closed his eyes, Matrióna came in and said that the <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">khozyáïka’s</i> manservant was there; that the landlady asks Pavel Konstantinuitch to call upon her immediately. Matrióna was trembling like an aspen leaf. Why should she tremble?</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
