<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">XII.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">It</span> thus came about that Miss Pólozova became acquainted with Viéra Pavlovna. She went to see her the very next morning; and Beaumont was so much interested, that he came back in the evening to find out how Katerina Vasílyevna liked her new acquaintance and the new enterprise.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Katerina Vasílyevna was greatly inspired. Her melancholy had entirely disappeared; her dreaminess had given way to enthusiasm. She eagerly related to Beaumont⁠—and she had already told her father, but once telling of it was not enough⁠—what she had seen that morning, and there <span><span data-page-index="449" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/449" data-page-number="429" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-683" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/449"/></span>seemed to be no end to her story; yes, now her heart was full. She had found a lively enterprise. Beaumont listened to her attentively; but can one be satisfied with listening only? And she said, almost with vexation, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaumont, I am disappointed in you. Does it have so little effect on you, that it only interests you, and nothing more?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Katerina Vasílyevna, you forget that I have seen all this at home in America; some of the details may be interesting to me; but the enterprise itself is too familiar to me. Only the people who carry it on with such success are of interest to me, while to you the thing is a novelty. For instance, what can you tell me about Madame Kirsánova?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Akh! Bozhe moi!</i> Of course I liked her very much indeed. She was so lovely in describing everything to me.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“You told me that before.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What else do you want? What more can I tell you? What attention could I give to her when I had such a novel thing before my eyes?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“That is so,” said Beaumont; “I understand we entirely forget about persons when we are interested in things; however, can’t you tell me something else about Madame Kirsánova?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Katerina Vasílyevna tried to gather all her recollections about Viéra Pavlovna, but she could only bring back the first impression which Viéra Pavlovna made upon her; she gave a very lively picture of her personal appearance, her way of speaking, all, in fact, that the eye takes in when meeting a stranger for the first time; but further, there was absolutely nothing in her recollections of Viéra Pavlovna that was of special interest: it was her work-shop, work-shop, work-shop, and Viéra Pavlovna’s explanations about the work-shop. She understood the explanations perfectly, but Viéra Pavlovna herself, from the time that followed their first meeting, made no impression upon her.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“And so this time I am disappointed in my expectations in learning about Madame Kirsánova; but I am not going to give you up; in a few days I shall ask you again about her.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“But why don’t you yourself make her acquaintance, if she interests you so?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I should like to do so; maybe I will do so some time. But before, I must learn more about her.”⁠—Beaumont was silent for a moment.⁠—“I was wondering whether to ask you or not; but it seems better to ask you, if you should happen <span><span data-page-index="450" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/450" data-page-number="430" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-684" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/450"/></span>to mention my name in your conversation with her, please don’t tell her that I have made any inquiries about her, or that I want to make her acquaintance some time.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“That’s very mysterious, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaumont,” said Katerina Vasílyevna in a serious tone. “You want to find out about them, and yet you yourself want to be concealed.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, Katerina Vasílyevna; how can I explain that to you? I am <i class="calibre13">afraid</i> to make their acquaintance.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“This is very strange, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaumont.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“It is true. I will speak plainer; I am afraid that it would be disagreeable to her. They have never heard my name. But I might have had some intercourse with some of the people that are friends of theirs, or even with themselves; it is all the same. In a word, I must know first whether it would be agreeable to them to make my acquaintance.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“All this is strange, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaumont.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I am an honest man, Katerina Vasílyevna; let me assure you that I would never think of putting you into a false position; this is only the second time that I have ever seen you, but I have a great respect for you.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I also see, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaumont, that you are a man worthy of respect, but⁠—”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“If you think that I am a man worthy of respect, you will allow me to call upon you, so that when you know me well enough, I can ask you again about the Kirsánofs. Or, rather, you will speak about them yourself when it will seem to you that you can fulfil my request which I shall make now, and which I shall not repeat. Do you agree?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“All right, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaumont,” said Katerina Vasílyevna, slightly shrugging her shoulders. “But you must confess that⁠—”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Again she did not want to finish her sentence.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“That my action seems rather suspicious? True; but I will wait till you get over your suspicions.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
