<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">XXVII.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">When</span> Viéra Pavlovna came out from her room the next morning, her husband and Masha were already packing two valises with things. And all the time Masha was hard at work; Lopukhóf gave her so many things to wrap up, and fold, and stow away, that Masha really could not attend to it all. "Viérotchka, you, too, come and help us." And all three of them were drinking tea, as they were taking down and stowing away things. Viéra Pavlovna had hardly time <span><span data-page-index="288" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/288" data-page-number="268" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-521" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/288"/></span>to collect her wits, when her husband said, "It is half-past eleven; it is time to go to the station."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"My dear,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-170"><a href="#calibre_link-117" type="noteref"><span>[</span>24<span>]</span></a></sup> I am going with thee."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"My love,<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-171"><a href="#calibre_link-118" type="noteref"><span>[</span>25<span>]</span></a></sup> Viérotchka, I am going to take two valises; there will be no room for you; you can go with Masha."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"I did not mean that; I mean to Riazan."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"Ah! if that's so, then Masha may bring along the valises, and we will go together."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">On the street you cannot well get sentimental in your talk. And besides, there is such a rattling over the pavement. Lopukhóf could not hear all that she said; he made a good many replies that could not be heard, or he would not reply at all.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"I am going with thee to Riazan," repeated Viéra Pavlovna.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">"But you have not got your things ready; how can you go? You can get ready if you want to; do just as seems best to you. But I would ask you one thing: wait till you get a letter from me. You will get it to-morrow; I shall write and mail it somewhere on my journey. To-morrow you will get it; wait, I beg of you."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">How she throws her arms around him at the gallery of the railway station! With what tears she kisses him, while seeing him into the car! And he speaks all the time about his business in the factory; how fine it is, and how glad his old folks will be to see him, and how everything in the world is dross compared with health, and how important it is for her to look out for her health; and just as he bids her good by, he says, speaking through the balustrade: "You wrote that you had never been so fond of me as you are now; this is true, my dear Viérotchka. And I am not less fond of you than you are of me. And the disposition towards a person,—the wishing his happiness,—this we both firmly believe in. But there is no happiness without freedom. You would not want to restrain me, nor I you. And if you began to use restraint on yourself on my account, you would grieve me; so don't do it. Do whatever you think is for your best. But we will see about it by and by. Write me, when you want me to come back. Good by, my dear;<sup class="reference" id="calibre_link-172"><a href="#calibre_link-119" type="noteref"><span>[</span>26<span>]</span></a></sup> the second bell has rung; it's time for the train to start. Good by."</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<span>
					<span data-page-index="289" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/289" data-page-number="269" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-522" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/289"/>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
