<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">XV.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">Katerina Vasílyevna’s</span> enthusiasm continued without diminution, but changed into a constant, habitual mood, earnest, eager, and bright. And, as it seemed to her, this enthusiasm drew Beaumont closer to her. And he thought a great deal about her; this was sufficiently apparent. Having heard two or three times what she had to tell about the Kirsánofs, on the fourth time he said: “I now know everything that I wanted to know about them. Thank you.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“But what do you know? I only told you that they love each other, and are perfectly happy in their married life.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“More than that I did not care to know. However, all that I knew already.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">The conversation turned on something else.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Of course Katerina Vasílyevna’s first thought was when he asked about Mrs. Kirsánova, that he was in love with Viéra Pavlovna. But no; it was perfectly evident that such was not the case. So far as Katerina Vasílyevna was able to judge him now, she thought that Beaumont was not even able to fall in love. Truly, to love was in his power; that is true. But if he loves any one now, it is I,” thought Katerina Vasílyevna.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
