<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">VII.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">Two</span> days later at morning tea, Viéra Pavlovna remarked to her husband that she did not like the color of his face. He said that he had not slept well the night before and that he had not felt well since evening, but it was of no consequence. He had caught a little cold at the picnic; of course during the time when he had been lying on the ground after their running and wrestling. He gave himself a little scolding for his carelessness, but he assured Viéra Pavlovna that it was a mere nothing, and he went to his business as usual; and at supper he said that apparently his ill turn had entirely passed, but on the following morning he said that he would have to stay at home for some time. Viéra Pavlovna, who had been greatly worried since the day before, became seriously frightened now and insisted on Dmitri Sergéitch calling a doctor.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“But I myself am a doctor, and can heal myself, if it is necessary; but, as yet, there is no need of doing anything,” said Dmitri Sergéitch, trying to smooth it off. But Viéra Pavlovna was inflexible, and so he wrote a note to Kirsánof, <span><span data-page-index="212" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/212" data-page-number="192" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-445" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/212"/></span>adding that his illness was trifling, and that he asked him to call, simply to please his wife.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Therefore, Kirsánof did not make haste; he stayed at the hospital till dinner time, and called at the Lopukhófs at six o’clock in the evening.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Well, Aleksandr, I did well to call you,” said Lopukhóf; “there is no danger, and I don’t think that there is going to be any; but I have inflammation of the lungs. Of course I could have cured myself without your aid, but for all that, please take my case in hand. It cannot be helped; it is necessary to satisfy my conscience; you see, I am not a bachelor, as you are.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">They made a long examination of the lung; Kirsánof sounded his chest, and they both agreed that Lopukhóf was not mistaken; there was no danger, and, in all probability, there would be none. But the inflammation of the lung was severe. It would be necessary for him to stay in the house for ten days, Lopukhóf for some time having neglected his illness, but yet it could be cured.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Kirsánof had to have a long talk with Viéra Pavlovna, to quiet her alarm. Finally she was convinced that they were not deceiving her; that, in all probability, the illness was not only not serious, but not even difficult; but this was only “<i class="calibre13">in all probability</i>“; but are there not contingencies which arise contrary to all probability?</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Kirsánof began to call twice a day on the sick man; they both saw that the illness was without complications, and not dangerous. On the fourth morning, Kirsánof said to Viéra Pavlovna:⁠—</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Dmitri is all right; everything is going well with him; for three or four days more it may be hard, but it will not be more severe than it is to-day, and then he will begin to gain. But I want to talk seriously about you yourself, Viéra Pavlovna. You do not act wisely, in sitting up all night; he does not need a nurse; he does not even need me. But you may harm yourself, all for nothing. Your nerves are already very much unstrung.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">For a long time he tried to reason with Viéra Pavlovna, but without avail. “I know it’s nothing,” and, “There’s no reason in it,” and “I should be glad to, but I cannot,”⁠—that is, glad to sleep in the night-time, and leave her husband without a watcher. Finally she said: “All that you are telling me now, he has already told me many times, as <span><span data-page-index="213" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/213" data-page-number="193" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-446" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/213"/></span>you know well. Of course, I would have listened to him sooner than to you; consequently, I can’t.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Against such an argument there is no disputing. Kirsánof shook his head and went away.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">He came to see the sick man at ten o’clock, that evening, and sat by his bedside, together with Viéra Pavlovna, for half an hour, and then he said: “Now, Viéra Pavlovna, go and get some rest. We both ask you to. I am going to stay here to-night.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Viéra Pavlovna hesitated; she herself knew, or more than half knew, that it was not necessary to sit all night beside the sick man, and here she is compelling Kirsánof, who is a busy man, to waste his time. And what was it in reality? “It apparently is not necessary”; <i class="calibre13">apparently</i>, but who knows? No; it is impossible to leave the <i class="calibre13">mílenki</i> alone! Who knows what might happen? He may want a drink, he may want tea; he is so delicate, he will not wake up; consequently, it is impossible not to sit by his side. But it is not necessary for Kirsánof; she will not allow it. She said that she would not go away, for she was not very tired; that she was taking a great deal of rest in the daytime:⁠—</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Under the present circumstances, I beg of you to leave us entirely to ourselves.” Kirsánof took her hand and led her from the room, almost by main force.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I am really ashamed of her, Aleksandr,” said the sick man; “what a ridiculous part you are playing, to sit up all night with a man who is not sick enough to need it. But I am very grateful to you. I could not even persuade her to hire a nurse, when she was afraid to leave me alone; she would not trust me in anybody’s hands.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“If I had not seen that it was impossible for her to be calm when you were in somebody else’s care, then, of course, I should not have disturbed my comfort. But now, I hope that she will get some sleep. I am a doctor, and I am your friend.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">In fact, Viéra Pavlovna, as soon as she touched her bed, fell sound asleep. Three sleepless nights in themselves would not have been so trying, and the worriment by itself would not have been so trying, but the worriment, together with the sleepless nights, without any rest in the daytime, was very dangerous; two or three days and nights more without sleep, and she would have been more seriously ill than her husband.</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="214" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/214" data-page-number="194" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-447" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/214"/></span>Kirsánof spent three nights more with the sick man, for it did not tire him much, because he slept very peacefully; only out of carefulness he locked the door, so that Viéra Pavlovna should not see his unconcern. She suspected that he slept instead of watching; she was calm, however, because he was a doctor, and there were no grounds for fear, were there? He himself knows whether he ought to sleep or not. She was ashamed that she could not have been calm before, so as not to have disturbed him; but now he paid no attention to her assurances, that she would sleep even though he were not there.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“You are to blame, Viéra Pavlovna, and, therefore, you must be punished; I do not trust you!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">But, in four days, it was perfectly obvious to her that the sick man was no longer sick; the proofs even to her skepticism were very clear; that very evening they were playing cards; Lopukhóf was half lying down, or was not even lying down at all, and he spoke in a very clear voice. Kirsánof could stop his somnolent watching, and announced that fact.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Aleksandr Matvéitch, why have you entirely forgotten me⁠—I mean <i class="calibre13">me?</i> You are always on good terms with Dmitri; he calls on you very often; but you have not called on us till this sickness⁠—it seems to me for a half a year, it’s such a long time! and, don’t you remember, we used to be very good friends?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“People change, Viéra Pavlovna. Then, again, I am working very hard, if I may say a word for myself. I call on scarcely anybody; I have no time; besides, I am lazy. You get so tired, being at the hospital and the medical school from nine o’clock till five, that you don’t feel it possible to go anywhere else, or make any change, except from your uniform into your smoking-jacket. Friendship is a good thing; but don’t get angry, if I say that a cigar on a sofa, in a smoking-jacket, is better still!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">And, in fact, Kirsánof had not called on the Lopukhófs for more than two years. The reader has not once noticed his name among the common guests, and among the frequent callers for a long time; he was the most infrequent of all.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<span>
					<span data-page-index="215" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/215" data-page-number="195" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-448" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/215"/>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
