<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="wst-center">
				<p class="calibre9">
					<span class="calibre14">VII.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="smallcaps">Marya Alekséyevna’s</span> words had many interpretations, and they were not less fecund in results. On the side of the special signification⁠—that is, as regarded the reduction in the price of the lessons⁠—Marya Alekséyevna attained greater success than she anticipated: when, after two more lessons, she insinuated that they were poor people, Dmitri Sergéitch at first stuck to his price⁠—stuck to it strenuously; for a long time he did not yield⁠—long insisted on his three paper rubles. (It must be remembered that at this time the three-ruble note was worth only seventy kopeks.) Marya Alekséyevna did not expect to beat down his price, but, contrary to all her expectations, succeeded in reducing the price to sixty kopeks a lesson. Apparently the special signification of her words⁠—the hope of beating down the price⁠—contradicted her high opinion of Dmitri Sergéitch (not of Lopukhóf, but of Dmitri Sergéitch) as of a man shrewd in money matters. “What would make a man, who is a keen financier, give in about money on account of our poverty?” And if Dmitri Sergéitch did yield, then, consequently, one would be disappointed in him, and find in him a short-sighted man, and therefore a man to be avoided. Of course she would judge that way in the case of a stranger; but human beings are so created that it is hard for them to judge of their own affairs according to the general rule. A man is extremely apt to make exceptions in his own favor.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> <span><span data-page-index="100" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/100" data-page-number="80" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-333" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/100"/></span>What can be done with this peculiarity of the human heart? It is bad; it is injurious; but Marya Alekséyevna was unfortunately not exempted from this fault, which is the almost universal affliction of the penurious, of the sneaks, and of the wicked. There is salvation from it in only two extreme and opposite kinds of moral right. A man may reach such a lofty plane of transcendental rascality that he becomes the eighth wonder of the world for his virtuosity in crime, like Ali Pasha Yaninska, Djezzar Pasha of Syria, Mahomet Ali of Egypt, all of whom deceived the European diplomats (and Djezzar deceived Napoleon the Great) as though they were children. When rascality has enclosed a man around with such an absolutely impregnable armor, that it is absolutely impossible to reach any human weakness, ambition, love of honors, love of command, love of self, or anything else, he is safe; but such heroes of rascality are very rare; you can scarcely find them in the countries of Europe, where virtuosity in wickedness is destroyed by a good many weak points. Therefore, if they show you a wily fellow, and say, “This fellow cannot be deceived by any one,” boldly put up ten rubles against one that you, although not so wily, will mislead this wily fellow, if you only make up <span class="wst-tooltip" title="[sic] 'your'">you</span> mind to do so; and still more boldly put up one hundred rubles against one that he himself is leading himself by the nose in some direction or other, because it is the most ordinary and characteristic feature in the wily to be led in some direction or other by the nose. How artful in all appearance were Louis Philippe and Metternich, and how nicely they led themselves by the nose out of Paris and Vienna, into golden and lovely places of bucolic calmness, and enjoyed the picture of “Makar driving his calves.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></p>
			<p class="calibre8">And Napoleon the First! what a wily rascal he was; wilier than Louis Philippe and Metternich taken together, and yet they say that with all his wiliness he had a genial temper. And thus how masterly he led himself by the nose to Elba; nay, he even wanted to go further, and dragged <span><span data-page-index="101" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/101" data-page-number="81" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-334" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/101"/></span>himself by the nose to <abbr>St.</abbr> Helena! How unlikely it seemed at first⁠—almost impossible; but he succeeded at last in overthrowing all the obstacles in the way of reaching the island of <abbr>St.</abbr> Helena. Just read over the history of the campaign of 1815, and you will see with what energy and skill he dragged himself by the nose. Alas! and even Marya Alekséyevna was not exempted from this injurious tendency!</p>
			<p class="calibre8">There are few people for whom the armor against temptation serves as an absolute protection from the deception of others. But on the other hand, there are a good many people for whom simple honesty of heart serves as a protection against such deception. According to the testimony of Vidocqs and Johnnie Cains, there is nothing harder than to deceive an honest, sincere man, if he has some common sense and knowledge of the world. Bright, honest men, who have their wits about them, are not liable to temptation individually. But they have in one respect a weakness that is injurious: when taken all together they are subject to deception. A rascal is not able to lead any <i class="calibre13">one</i> of them by the nose, but the noses of them taken collectively are always ready for use. But the rascals, whose noses individually are weak, cannot be led by the nose. In this consists the whole mystery of the history of the world.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">But to branch off into the history of the world is not necessary. When you are writing a novel go ahead with your novel!</p>
			<p class="calibre8">The first result of Marya Alekséyevna’s words was the cheapening of the lessons. The second result was that by getting the tutor cheaper, that is, not the tutor, but Dmitri Sergéitch, Marya Alekséyevna was still more confirmed in her good opinion of him as a man of solidity. She even came to the conviction that conversation with him would be profitable for Viérotchka; his influence will dispose Viérotchka to marry Mikhaïl Ivanuitch. This conclusion was extremely brilliant, and Marya Alekséyevna would probably not have reached it by her own wit, but she met with such plain proof that she could not help noticing Dmitri Sergéitch’s good influence over Viérotchka. How this was proved to her we shall soon see.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">The third result of Marya Alekséyevna’s words was that Viérotchka and Dmitri Sergéitch began under her encouragement and permission to spend considerable time together. After he had finished giving his lessons, towards eight <span><span data-page-index="102" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/102" data-page-number="82" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-335" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/102"/></span>o’clock, Lopukhóf used to stay for two or three hours longer at the Rozalskys. He played cards with the mother of the family and the bridegroom; he talked with them; he played on the piano, and Viérotchka would sing; or Viérotchka played, and he would listen. Sometimes he spoke with Viérotchka, and Marya Alekséyevna did not interfere, was not angry, although, of course, she did not leave them without her supervision.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Oh, of course, she did not leave them absolutely to themselves; because, although Dmitri Sergéitch was a very proper young man, still the proverb does not say in vain, “Don’t hide things carelessly, and you won’t lead a thief into sin.” Dmitri Sergéitch is a thief, there is no doubt about it; but it is not said by way of blame, but on the contrary; otherwise, there wouldn’t be any reason for respecting him and making him a friend of the family, would there? Is there any sense of making the acquaintance of fools? Of course it is well to make the acquaintance of fools sometimes⁠—when you can take advantage of them. But Dmitri Sergéitch has nothing to his name as yet; it must be, therefore, that they are friendly with him only because of his good qualities; that is, for his sense, solidity, prudence, and skill in managing his own affairs. And if every one has⁠—the deuce knows what⁠—in his mind, then such a clever man must have more than others. Consequently we must look and look at Dmitri Sergéitch.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">And Marya Alekséyevna studied him very industriously and energetically; but all her observations only corroborated her opinion of Dmitri Sergéitch’s solidity and good character. For instance, how can one tell amorous intentions? By noticing the way in which a young man looks at a girl. Here Viérotchka is playing and Dmitri Sergéitch is standing and listening, and Marya Alekséyevna is watching the direction in which he turns his eyes. But sometimes he does not even look at Viérotchka; he looks anywhere else; or sometimes, when he is looking at her, he looks so innocently, so indifferently into her face, that it can quickly be seen that he is looking at her only out of politeness and is thinking of his bride’s dowry. His eyes do not burn like Mikhaïl Ivanuitch’s! Again, how can the existence of love be detected? By caressing words. But in this case no caressing words are heard, and they really speak very little together; he talks by preference with Marya Alekséyevna, or, here <span><span data-page-index="103" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/103" data-page-number="83" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-336" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/103"/></span>for instance, he began to bring Viérotchka books. Once Viérotchka went to see a friend, and Mikhaïl Ivanuitch was at the Rozalskys’. Marya Alekséyevna took the books that the tutor brought and handed them to Mikhaïl Ivanuitch.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Just look here, Mikhaïl Ivanuitch. This French I almost understand by myself. This word <i class="calibre13">gostinaïa</i> [meaning drawing-room], of course, it must be a book about manners, ain’t it? but the German one I don’t understand.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“No, Marya Alekséyevna, that word is not <i class="calibre13">gostinaïa</i>, but <i class="calibre13">destinée</i>, fate.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What kind of a fate? Is it a novel that’s called so, or is it a sort of oracle or fortune book.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“We will quickly find out, Marya Alekséyevna, from the book itself.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Mikhaïl Ivanuitch turned several of the leaves.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“It seems to speak mostly about series and things; I guess it is a scientific book.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“About serious things? That is good!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“No, series.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What! series? Oh yes, banknotes. Then it’s something about managing money!”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, that’s it, Marya Alekséyevna.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“<i class="calibre13">Nu!</i> what’s the German one?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Mikhaïl Ivanuitch read slowly:⁠—</p>
			<p class="calibre8"><span class="calibre42">“</span>‘Concerning Religion; works of Ludwig.’ Oh, yes, Ludwig the Fourteenth, Marya Alekséyevna; this is the work of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. He was a French king, Marya Alekséyevna, the father of the king in whose place Napoleon is reigning now.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Then it must be a theological work?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Yes, I think so.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“That is good, Mikhaïl Ivanuitch; yes, indeed, I knew it! Dmitri Sergéitch is a reliable young man; still one must keep his eyes sharp on any young man.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Of course he has no bad intentions in his mind, but, for all that, I am extremely grateful to you, Marya Alekséyevna, for keeping your eyes open.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“One’s got to do so; I am on the watch, Mikhaïl Ivanuitch; it’s a mother’s duty to keep her daughter straight, and I pledge you my honor as far as Viérotchka is concerned. But there’s one thing occurs to me, Mikhaïl Ivanuitch. “What belief did that French king hold?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Catholic, naturally!”</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8"><span><span data-page-index="104" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/104" data-page-number="84" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-337" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/104"/></span>“Then, don’t he try to convert folks into the papistry?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I don’t think so, Marya Alekséyevna; if he had been a Catholic bishop, then, of course, he would have tried to make converts; but a king would not spend his time that way. As a wise ruler and politician he’d simply teach virtue.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“What else?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Marya Alekséyevna could not help seeing that Mikhaïl Ivanuitch, with all his narrow mind, argued the case very skilfully; but for all that she cleared up the matter with perfect satisfaction. Two or three days later she suddenly said to Lopukhóf, while playing with him rather than with Mikhaïl Ivanuitch:⁠—</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Tell me, Dmitri Sergéitch; I want to ask you something. The father of the last French king, the very man in whose shoes the present Napoleon is reigning, did he make folks git converted into the religion of the Pope?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“No, he did not, Marya Alekséyevna.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“Is the Pope’s religion good, Dmitri Sergéitch?”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“No, it is not, Marya Alekséyevna. I play seven of diamonds.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“I just asked out of curiosity, Dmitri Sergéitch, being as I’m an ignorant woman, and it is interesting to know. You are taking a good many tricks, Dmitri Sergéitch.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">“It can’t be helped, Marya Alekséyevna. We are taught at the medical school to play cards well. A doctor must know how to take tricks.”</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Lopukhóf is puzzled to this day to know why Marya Alekséyevna wanted to know whether Philippe Egalité ordered folks to be baptized in the religion of the Pope.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">Well, how, after all this, could it be wondered at that Marya Alekséyevna stopped wearying herself by perpetual supervision? He keeps his eyes where they should be, his face has shown no amorous susceptibilities; he gives her theological books to read; that ought to be enough. But no, Marya Alekséyevna was not satisfied; but she even managed to put him to a test, as though she had studied the logic which I have learned by heart, and which says, “the observations of phenomena must be made by means of experiments, carried on in a skilful plan, if one would have the most thorough penetration into the secrets of such relations”; and she so managed to bring about this trial, as though she had read Sakson’s grammar, which tells how Hamlet was tempted by Ophelia in the grove.</p>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<br class="calibre3"/>
			</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p class="calibre8">
				<span>
					<span data-page-index="105" data-page-name="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/105" data-page-number="85" data-page-quality="3" id="calibre_link-338" title="Page:Chernyshevsky.whatistobedone.djvu/105"/>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
